

        TLA+2 MODE FOR EMACS


0. Installation

Copy the file tla-mode.el in some directory (for example, ~/lib).  Add
the following line to your ~/.emacs file, changing the directory name
as needed:
  (load-file "~/lib/tla-mode.el")


1. Syntax Coloring

Two faces are defined.  You can change them to customize the
syntax coloring.

tla-tabs-face
  Used for tab characters.  By default: red background.

tla-ellipsis-face
  Used for the end of line after an ellipsis.  This is used only if
  you activate the tla-ellipsis-line option.


2. Automatic up-casing of keywords

This uses emacs's abbrev mode.  Just type the keyword in lower case and
it is automatically converted to upper case.  This feature is disabled
by default.  To enable it, add this line to your .emacs after the line
that loads tla-mode.el:
  (setq tla-mode-enable-abbrevs t)


3. Hiding and showing parts of the proof trees

This uses emacs's outline mode.  You can focus on some subtree of the
proof by hiding other parts.  The commands are as follows.  In the
following, the "current node" is the node that contains the point and
the "current subtree" is the subtree rooted at the current node.
The root node of a proof is the THEOREM keyword and the name and
statement that follow it.

key                  command

control-PageUp       tla-hide-all
  Hide all non-root nodes in the file.

control-PageDown     tla-show-all
  Show all proof nodes in the file.

control-DownArrow    tla-show-subtree
  Show all nodes of the current subtree.

control-UpArrow      tla-hide-subtree
  Hide the current node's descendents.

control-RightArrow   tla-show-node
  Show the current node and the headings of its sons.

control-LeftArrow    tla-hide-node
  Hide the current node's descendents.

control-c control-s  tla-show-focus
  Show the current subtree and the branch leading to it (its ancestors
  and their siblings), and hide all other nodes.


If you want Emacs to hide all proofs whenever it opens a TLA+2 file,
add this line to your .emacs after the line that loads tla-mode.el:
  (setq tla-mode-hide-on-open t)


4. Selectively disabling and enabling leaf proofs

This is done by editing the text file to add and remove the characters
(*{_}*) before the BY, OBVIOUS, PICK, HAVE and WITNESS keywords.  This
is done only on keywords that are preceded by a newline or a space.
If you add a (*comment*) right before the keyword, it will be ignored
by these commands.

A leaf node is called "disabled" if it has (*{_}*) before its keyword
and "enabled" if it doesn't.


key                  command

control-c control-a  tla-enable-all
  Enable all leaf nodes in the file.  (A for all)

control-c control-n  tla-disable-all
  Disable all leaf nodes in the file.  (N for none)

control-c control-e  tla-enable-subtree
  Enable the leaf nodes of the current subtree.

control-c control-d  tla-disable-subtree
  Disable the leaf nodes of the current subtree.

control-c control-t  tla-enable-focus
  Enable the leaf nodes of the current subtree and disable all other
  leaf nodes.

control-c control-o  tla-disable-above
  Disable all leaf nodes from the beginning of the file to the cursor.


5. Miscellaneous commands

These two are the most useful.

key                  command

control-c control-f  tla-focus
  Show the current subtree and the branch leading to it and hide
  everything else.  Enable the current subtree and disable everything
  else.

control-c control-l  tla-goto-last-error
  Go to the last location mentioned in the *compilation* buffer.  When
  Isabelle's auto tactic fails to terminate, this will show which
  leaf proof it is trying to prove.


6. Options

Tla-mode has five options that you can set, by setting variables after
loading tla-mode.el but before loading any TLA+ file.

- Automatic up-casing of keywords.  Enabled with:
    (setq tla-enable-abbrevs t)
- Hiding of all proofs when opening a file.  Enabled with:
    (setq tla-hide-on-open t)
- Marking the hidden proofs with a horizontal line that extends to the
  right margin.  Enabled with:
    (setq tla-ellipsis-line t)
- Putting the ellipsis at the end of the statement instead of putting it
  on its own line.  Enabled with:
    (setq tla-ellipsis-compact t)
- Changing the ellipsis string to whatever string you want.  For example,
  you can change it from the default "--- proof hidden ---" to "..." with:
    (setq ellipsis-string "...")

$Id$
